ExternalPythonOperator tutorial (#1469)
astronomer/docs: learn/external-python-operator.md

---
title: "Run Snowpark queries with the ExternalPythonOperator"
sidebar_label: "ExternalPythonOperator"
description: "Learn how to run a Snowpark query in a virtual Python environment using the ExternalPythonOperator in Airflow."
id: external-python-operator
---

It is very common in data science and data engineering use cases to need to run a task with different requirements from your Airflow environment. Your task may need a different Python version than Airflow, or require packages that conflict with core Airflow or your other tasks. In these cases, running tasks in an isolated environment can help manage dependency conflicts and enable compatibility with your execution environments.

> In this tutorial, you'll learn how to use the [ExternalPythonOperator](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/operator/python.html#externalpythonoperator) to run a task that leverages the [Snowpark API](https://www.snowflake.com/snowpark/) for data transformations. Snowpark requires Python 3.8, while Airflow will be using Python 3.9. The ExternalPythonOperator will run a task in an existing Python virtual environment, allowing you to choose a different Python version for particular tasks. 

Author: Good call, added a sentence. @manmeetkaur feel free to suggest something more specific based on what you've seen customers doing if you think that would be helpful.

        pyenv activate snowpark_env && \
        pip install --no-cache-dir --upgrade pip && \
        pip install --no-cache-dir -r snowpark_requirements.txt
    ```

    These commands install `pyenv` in your Airflow environment and create a Python 3.8 virtual environment called `snowpark_env` with the required packages to run Snowpark that will be used by the ExternalPythonOperator. The `pyenv` environment will be created when you start your Airflow project, and can be used by any number of ExternalPythonOperator tasks. If you use a different virtual environment package (e.g. `venv` or `conda`) you may need to update this step.

4. Add the following to your `packages.txt` file:

    ```text
    git
    make
    build-essential
    libssl-dev
    zlib1g-dev
    libbz2-dev
    libreadline-dev
    libsqlite3-dev
    wget
    curl
    llvm
    libncurses5-dev
    libncursesw5-dev
    xz-utils
    tk-dev
    libpq-dev
    krb5-config
    ```

    This installs all the needed packages to run `pyenv` in your Airflow environment.

5. Run the following command to start your project in a local environment:

    ```sh
    astro dev start
    ```

## Step 4: Create your DAG

> In your Astro project `dags/` folder, create a new file called `external-python-pipeline.py`. Paste the following code into the file:

Author: I did see that, thanks for catching. Will probably need to update every folder name I've ever written 😁

```python
from __future__ import annotations

import logging
import os
import sys
import tempfile
import time
import shutil
from pprint import pprint

import pendulum

from airflow import DAG
from airflow.decorators import task

log = logging.getLogger(__name__)

PYTHON = sys.executable

BASE_DIR = tempfile.gettempdir()

> with DAG('py_virtual_env', schedule_interval=None, start_date=pendulum.datetime(2022, 10, 10, tz="UTC"), catchup=False, tags=['pythonvirtualenv']) as dag:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with DAG(
    'py_virtual_env',
    schedule_interval=None,
    start_date=pendulum.datetime(2022, 10, 10, tz="UTC"),
    catchup=False,
    tags=['pythonvirtualenv']
) as dag:
```

Sorry about the picky formatting suggestion 😅

    
    @task(task_id="print_the_context")
    def print_context(ds=None, **kwargs):
        """Print the Airflow context and ds variable from the context."""
        pprint(kwargs)
        print(ds)
        return 'Whatever you return gets printed in the logs'

>     @task.external_python(task_id="external_python", python='/home/astro/.pyenv/versions/snowpark_env/bin/python')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    @task.external_python(
        task_id="external_python",
        python='/home/astro/.pyenv/versions/snowpark_env/bin/python'
    )
```

    def callable_external_python():
        from time import sleep
        import pkg_resources
        from snowflake.snowpark import Session

        import boto3
        import json

>         
>         ssm = boto3.client('ssm', region_name='us-east-1')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        
        # Retrieving connection information from the external secrets manager
        ssm = boto3.client('ssm', region_name='us-east-1')
```

        parameter = ssm.get_parameter(Name='/airflow/connections/snowflake', WithDecryption=True)
        conn = json.loads(parameter['Parameter']['Value'])
        
        ## Checking for the correct venv packages	
        installed_packages = pkg_resources.working_set
        installed_packages_list = sorted(["%s==%s" % (i.key, i.version)
                for i in installed_packages])

>         print(installed_packages_list)

Author: Yeah good call - I think it's just for debugging, but can double check with @manmeetkaur

>         print(installed_packages_list)

Reviewer 2: yes @TJaniF @kentdanas that check is just for debugging; I used it initially to verify if my packages were installed.

>         print(installed_packages_list)

Author: Cool - added a note to the text and expanded the comment in the code a bit.

> 
>         connection_parameters = {

Reviewer: ```suggestion

        # Defining parameters for Airflow's Snowpark connection
        connection_parameters = {
```

If I understood that correctly, the connection has to be defined within the task because the task would not have access to connections defined in the Airflow instance?

Author: Correct. Since it is running in a virtual environment it's completely isolated from Airflow's environment. You can pass things in, but to pass an Airflow object you would need to install Airflow in the virtual environment which I think we probably don't want to do here.

        print(df.collect())
        session.close()

    task_print = print_context()
    task_external_python = callable_external_python()

    task_print >> task_external_python
```

This DAG prints the context of your Airflow environment before using the `@task.external_python` decorator to run a Snowpark query in the virtual environment you created in Step 3. 

This example pulls Snowflake connection information from AWS Parameter Store. If you are using a different secrets manager, you will need to update the following lines:

```python
import boto3
import json

ssm = boto3.client('ssm', region_name='us-east-1')
parameter = ssm.get_parameter(Name='/airflow/connections/snowflake', WithDecryption=True)
conn = json.loads(parameter['Parameter']['Value'])
```

To run the DAG without an external secrets manager, simply provide your connection information directly in the `connection_parameters` dictionary (note that this is not best practice as sensitive information will be stored in your DAG file).

Finally, if you chose to use an existing Snowflake table rather than create the one described in Step 1, you may need to update the SQL provided in this line:

```python

> df = session.sql('select current_warehouse(), current_database(), current_schema()')

Reviewer: The query in this line does not exist in the DAG file above. Did you mean that users need to adjust the table/columns they are querying in `df = session.sql('select avg(reps_upper), avg(reps_lower) from dog_intelligence;')` ?

Author: Oh whoops - yes, I copied that snippet before I updated the query.

---
title: "Run Snowpark queries with the ExternalPythonOperator"
sidebar_label: "ExternalPythonOperator"
description: "Learn how to run a Snowpark query in a virtual Python environment using the ExternalPythonOperator in Airflow."
id: external-python-operator
---

It is very common in data science and data engineering use cases to need to run a task with different requirements from your Airflow environment. Your task may need a different Python version than Airflow, or require packages that conflict with core Airflow or your other tasks. In these cases, running tasks in an isolated environment can help manage dependency conflicts and enable compatibility with your execution environments.

> In this tutorial, you'll learn how to use the [ExternalPythonOperator](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/howto/operator/python.html#externalpythonoperator) to run a task that leverages the [Snowpark API](https://www.snowflake.com/snowpark/) for data transformations. Snowpark allows you to run queries and transformations on your data using different programming languages, making it a flexible addition to traditional Snowflake operators. Snowpark requires Python 3.8, while Airflow will be using Python 3.9. The ExternalPythonOperator will run a task in an existing Python virtual environment, allowing you to choose a different Python version for particular tasks. 

Reviewer 2: @kentdanas the target audience for this is Airflow Users or Astro users? if both, then we should specify or clearly state that for this example we are using latest `astro-runtime` (versions 3.0+) which uses python 3.9;  where as OSS Airflow as of `2.4.2` OSS uses 3.7 as the base for its image.

Author: Target audience is both - should be available to OSS users but also relevant for Astro users. Can definitely add a note about this.

3. Update the `Dockerfile` of your Astro project to install `pyenv` and its requirements:

    ```docker
    FROM quay.io/astronomer/astro-runtime:6.0.3

    ##### Docker Customizations below this line #####

    ## The directory where `pyenv` will be installed. You can update the path as needed
    ENV PYENV_ROOT="/home/astro/.pyenv" 
    ENV PATH=${PYENV_ROOT}/bin:${PATH}

    ## If you want to check your dependency conflicts for extra packages that you may require for your ## venv, uncomment the following two lines to install pip-tools
    # RUN pip-compile -h
    # RUN pip-compile snowpark_requirements.txt

    ## Install the required version of pyenv and create the virtual environment
    RUN curl https://pyenv.run | bash  && \
        eval "$(pyenv init -)" && \
        pyenv install 3.8.14 && \
        pyenv virtualenv 3.8.14 snowpark_env && \
        pyenv activate snowpark_env && \
        pip install --no-cache-dir --upgrade pip && \
        pip install --no-cache-dir -r snowpark_requirements.txt
    ```

>     These commands install `pyenv` in your Airflow environment and create a Python 3.8 virtual environment called `snowpark_env` with the required packages to run Snowpark that will be used by the ExternalPythonOperator. The `pyenv` environment will be created when you start your Airflow project, and can be used by any number of ExternalPythonOperator tasks. If you use a different virtual environment package (e.g. `venv` or `conda`) you may need to update this step.

Reviewer 2: @kentdanas @TJaniF want to point out one point here, the build of this `Dockerfile` takes about 20-30 mins. This will only be for the first time now that we have `dag-only` deploys. If we don't want to follow DAG-only deploys and we want to avoid larger build times even when we change a DAG file, we will have to switch to use the `base` image and not `ONBUILD` image.

Author: Interesting, it didn't take that long for me (I wasn't paying super close attention but it seemed like only 10ish minutes). The tutorial is designed for OSS users so `dag-only` deploys won't be relevant. I can add a note about the build time, but I think we're okay to keep it as is.

Reviewer 2: thanks @kentdanas

    ```sh
    astro dev start
    ```

## Step 4: Create your DAG

In your Astro project `dags` folder, create a new file called `external-python-pipeline.py`. Paste the following code into the file:

```python
from __future__ import annotations

import logging
import os
import sys
import tempfile
import time
import shutil
from pprint import pprint

import pendulum

from airflow import DAG
from airflow.decorators import task

log = logging.getLogger(__name__)

PYTHON = sys.executable

BASE_DIR = tempfile.gettempdir()

with DAG(
    'py_virtual_env',
    schedule_interval=None,
    start_date=pendulum.datetime(2022, 10, 10, tz="UTC"),
    catchup=False,
    tags=['pythonvirtualenv']
) as dag:
    
    @task(task_id="print_the_context")
    def print_context(ds=None, **kwargs):
        """Print the Airflow context and ds variable from the context."""
        pprint(kwargs)
        print(ds)
        return 'Whatever you return gets printed in the logs'

    @task.external_python(
        task_id="external_python",
        python='/home/astro/.pyenv/versions/snowpark_env/bin/python'
    )
    def callable_external_python():
        from time import sleep

>         import pkg_resources

Reviewer 2: this is also optional and can be removed if we are not checking packages

        from snowflake.snowpark import Session

        import boto3
        import json
        

>         # Retrieving connection information from the external secrets manager

Reviewer 2: sorry this is my bad, it should be AWS Parameter Store which is used to store our secrets

Author: I intentionally kept the comment general since we instruct the user to update those lines if they are using a different secrets manager.

Reviewer 2: 👍

        parameter = ssm.get_parameter(Name='/airflow/connections/snowflake', WithDecryption=True)
        conn = json.loads(parameter['Parameter']['Value'])
        
        ## Checking for the correct venv packages	
        installed_packages = pkg_resources.working_set
        installed_packages_list = sorted(["%s==%s" % (i.key, i.version)
                for i in installed_packages])
        print(installed_packages_list)

        # Defining parameters for Airflow's Snowpark connection
        connection_parameters = {
            "account": conn['extra']['account'],
            "user": conn['login'],
            "password": conn['password'],
            "role": conn['extra']['role'],
            "warehouse": conn['extra']['warehouse'],
            "database": conn['extra']['database'],
            "schema": conn['schema'],
            "region": conn['extra']['region']
        }
        # Creating a connection session between Snowpark and Airflow
        session = Session.builder.configs(connection_parameters).create()
        # Running a SQL query in Snowpark
        df = session.sql('select avg(reps_upper), avg(reps_lower) from dog_intelligence;')

>         print(df)

Reviewer 2: this line is redundant; we already printing `df.collect()`

    ```text
    AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=<your-access-key-id>
    AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=<your-secret-access-key>
    ```

    Add the `secrets-manager.env` file to your project's ``.gitignore` file so sensitive credentials aren't tracked in git.

    If you are not using an external secrets manager, you can skip this step.

    :::note

    There are many ways to connect your virtual environment to your secrets manager beyond what is presented here, including passing a profile with a shared credential file or having your environment assume a role that has access to your secrets manager. The access key and secret method described here is the most straight forward when working with a local project, but may not be recommended for production in some organizations.

    ::: 

4. Update the `Dockerfile` of your Astro project to install `pyenv` and its requirements:

    ```docker

>     FROM quay.io/astronomer/astro-runtime:6.0.3

Author: Ah good call. I switched the order of the steps so you create the Dockerfile without the secrets env file first, and then in the optional part 4 added something to source the env in the Dockerfile if using. Maybe this will be clearer...

```text
[2022-11-17, 18:55:56 UTC] {process_utils.py:179} INFO - Executing cmd: /home/astro/.pyenv/versions/snowpark_env/bin/python /tmp/tmd_3cp_1al/script.py /tmp/tmd_3cp_1al/script.in /tmp/tmd_3cp_1al/script.out /tmp/tmd_3cp_1al/string_args.txt
[2022-11-17, 18:55:56 UTC] {process_utils.py:183} INFO - Output:
[2022-11-17, 18:56:02 UTC] {process_utils.py:187} INFO - ['asn1crypto==1.5.1', 'boto3==1.26.10', 'botocore==1.29.10', 'certifi==2022.9.24', 'cffi==1.15.1', 'charset-normalizer==2.1.1', 'cloudpickle==2.0.0', 'cryptography==38.0.3', 'filelock==3.8.0', 'idna==3.4', 'jmespath==1.0.1', 'numpy==1.23.4', 'oscrypto==1.3.0', 'pandas==1.5.1', 'pip==22.3.1', 'pyarrow==8.0.0', 'pycparser==2.21', 'pycryptodomex==3.15.0', 'pyjwt==2.6.0', 'pyopenssl==22.1.0', 'python-dateutil==2.8.2', 'pytz==2022.6', 'requests==2.28.1', 's3transfer==0.6.0', 'setuptools==56.0.0', 'six==1.16.0', 'snowflake-connector-python==2.8.1', 'snowflake-snowpark-python==1.0.0', 'typing-extensions==4.4.0', 'urllib3==1.26.12', 'wheel==0.38.4']
[2022-11-17, 18:56:02 UTC] {process_utils.py:187} INFO - <snowflake.snowpark.dataframe.DataFrame object at 0x7f69710e1d60>

> [2022-11-17, 18:56:02 UTC] {process_utils.py:187} INFO - [Row(AVG(REPS_UPPER)=Decimal('41.507353'), AVG(REPS_LOWER)=Decimal('25.588235'))]

Reviewer: Extremely nitpicky but I get `[Row(AVG(REPS_UPPER)=Decimal('18.250000'), AVG(REPS_LOWER)=Decimal('11.000000'))]` I assume you copied the logs of running it against the whole dog intelligence dataset? Highly doubt anyone would notice though.

Author: hmm....I didn't run it against the whole dataset, just the one I instruct users to create in step 1. Weird...it shouldn't be different, but probably doesn't matter that much.

---

> title: "Run Snowpark queries with the ExternalPythonOperator"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: "Run Snowpark queries with the ExternalPythonOperator in Apache Airflow"
```

        ssm = boto3.client('ssm', region_name='us-east-1')
        parameter = ssm.get_parameter(Name='/airflow/connections/snowflake', WithDecryption=True)
        conn = json.loads(parameter['Parameter']['Value'])

        # Defining parameters for Airflow's Snowpark connection
        connection_parameters = {
            "account": conn['extra']['account'],
            "user": conn['login'],
            "password": conn['password'],
            "role": conn['extra']['role'],
            "warehouse": conn['extra']['warehouse'],
            "database": conn['extra']['database'],
            "schema": conn['schema'],
            "region": conn['extra']['region']
        }
        # Creating a connection session between Snowpark and Airflow
        session = Session.builder.configs(connection_parameters).create()
        # Running a SQL query in Snowpark
        df = session.sql('select avg(reps_upper), avg(reps_lower) from dog_intelligence;')
        print(df.collect())
        # Closing the connection session
        session.close()

    task_print = print_context()
    task_external_python = callable_external_python()

    task_print >> task_external_python
```

> This DAG prints the context of your Airflow environment before using the `@task.external_python` decorator to run a Snowpark query in the virtual environment you created in [Step 3](#step-3-configure-your-astro-project). The ExternalPythonOperator task also prints a list of packages installed in the virtual environment; this is optional, but can be helpful for debugging if something goes wrong.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This DAG prints the context of your Airflow environment before using the `@task.external_python` decorator to run a Snowpark query in the virtual environment you created in [Step 3](#step-3-configure-your-astro-project). The ExternalPythonOperator task also prints a list of packages installed in the virtual environment, which can be helpful for debugging.
```

This example pulls Snowflake connection information from AWS Parameter Store. If you are using a different secrets manager, you will need to update the following lines:

```python
import boto3
import json

ssm = boto3.client('ssm', region_name='us-east-1')
parameter = ssm.get_parameter(Name='/airflow/connections/snowflake', WithDecryption=True)
conn = json.loads(parameter['Parameter']['Value'])
```

To run the DAG without an external secrets manager, simply provide your connection information directly in the `connection_parameters` dictionary (note that this is not best practice as sensitive information will be stored in your DAG file).

## Step 5: Run your DAG to execute your Snowpark query in a virtual environment

> Go to the Airflow UI, unpause your `py_virtual_env` DAG, and trigger it to run your Snowpark query in an isolated Python virtual environment. Go to the task logs and you should see the list of installed packages and the results of your query printed:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Go to the Airflow UI, unpause your `py_virtual_env` DAG and trigger it to run your Snowpark query in an isolated Python virtual environment. Open your tasks logs to see the list of installed packages and the results of your query printed:
```

[2022-11-17, 18:56:02 UTC] {process_utils.py:187} INFO - <snowflake.snowpark.dataframe.DataFrame object at 0x7f69710e1d60>
[2022-11-17, 18:56:02 UTC] {process_utils.py:187} INFO - [Row(AVG(REPS_UPPER)=Decimal('41.507353'), AVG(REPS_LOWER)=Decimal('25.588235'))]
[2022-11-17, 18:56:02 UTC] {python.py:177} INFO - Done. Returned value was: None
[2022-11-17, 18:56:02 UTC] {taskinstance.py:1401} INFO - Marking task as SUCCESS. dag_id=py_virtual_env, task_id=external_python, execution_date=20221117T185554, start_date=20221117T185555, end_date=20221117T185602
```

## Other methods for running tasks in isolated environments

> Airflow has several other options for running tasks in isolated environments. Which you should choose  depends on your use case and your Airflow infrastructure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Airflow has several other options for running tasks in isolated environments:
```
